20241022160641

Tags: [[Quantum Systems]]

Qubits are extremely sensitive to the environment, so the idea behind quantum sensing is to use noisy qubits as sensor devices. Control over the operation is less important as a result of the operation just being reading the state of the qubit. Entanglement allows for better scaling rather than a limit on the "shot noise". Squeezing allows the sensitivity of the signal to increase arbitrarily. 

## Quantum Sensing Protocol
The process for quantum sensing starts with a qubit or a entangled set of qubits in superposition. Then, let that system sit there for one coherence time, any shorter and the ability for the environment to couple with the qubit would reduce, and longer then the system would collapse to a classical state. Finally, the state is read out and the process is repeated.

## Sensitivity
The sensitivity is determined by
#### $$v_{min} = \frac{\sqrt{ 2e }}{γC\sqrt{ T_{χ} }}$$
where E is the logarithmic constant, γ is the coupling constant, C is the efficiency, and $Τ_{χ}$ is the coherence time. 

## Example: Nitrogen Vacancy Center Magnetometry
Nitrogen vacancy center magnetometry is an implementation of quantum sensing, where the a magnetic field would result in the spin state to split, and the spin state is use to determine the signal. They use a technique called optically-detected magnetic resonance (ODMR), which is similar to MRI, and it uses microwave signals to put the nitrogen vacancies into superposition and laser pulses to read the state. The peak to peak difference is the contrast, and it shows how efficient the system is. A typical NV center system would have a green laser pointed towards the crystal. Through a green light filter, it would result in a red glow as a result of the nitrogen vacancies fluorescing, and the microwave pulse would adjust the brightness of that glow. If the NV center emits a red photon, then the spin is 0, if it's dark, then the state is at ±1. NV centers work reliably up to 1000K. In terms of computing, NV centers are a low upkeep method of doing quantum computing, but there are issues with the deterministic creation of individual defects, where they have to be close enough to for the qubits to communicate and far enough to avoid interference. 

#### Quantum Magnetoencephelography
Magnetoencephelography (MEG) is a technique used for brain-imaging, where the magnetic signatures of the brain's activities are measured in real time. The current system is technologically demanding due to the large cryogenic tanks used and the shielded rooms. Quantum versions involve optically-pumped magnetometers, where lasers are shined at NV centers to make them sensitive to the brain's magnetic fields. 

## Example: Photon Interferometry at LIGO
LIGO has a laser-interferometer which measures gravitational waves generated by the collapse of stars. The noise of the wave traveling through space and the atmosphere is what caused early observations to fail. Quantum squeezing is what enabled improvements in sensitivity and positive results. 

## Example: Gravity Interferometers
Very cold atoms enter a "quantum" phase of matter called the Bose-Einstein constant. In a gravity interferometer, atoms are launched up a fountain, and the atoms' function create an interference pattern as they fall back to a screen. The spacing of the interference waves is proportional the the acceleration. It has sensitivities of around $10^{-9}$. 

#### Mapping
The Earth's gravity field is not uniform, and so gravity interferometer can be used to map the underground and could be used for mining, prospecting, and aquifer depletion. Gravity interferometers also offer higher resolution than classical gravimeters. 

#### Security
In 2011, LLNL and AOSense tested an interferometer for nuclear material screening. Uranium and plutonium are very dense and are easy to hide in low-kg quantities. Gravitational anomalies plus gamma/neutron measurements could increase the reliability for screening nuclear material.
## Example: Plasmonic Sensors
Electrons in a metal oscillate like a wave. The frequency of the oscillation is the plasma frequency and a single wave is a plasmon. Light at certain wavelengths could couple to the surface electron of a metal. The presence of nearby materials could affect the resonant frequency, and that could be used to find rare earth metals, identify DNA bases, and trace chemicals. 